San José State University Writing Center
www.sjsu.edu/writingcenter
Written by Mario John Chris

Methodology Section for Research Papers
The methodology section of your paper describes how your
research was conducted. This information allows readers to check
whether your approach is accurate and dependable. A good
methodology can help increase the reader’s trust in your findings.
First, we will define and differentiate quantitative and qualitative
research. Then, for each of these types of research, we will look
at the kinds of information that a methodology should provide.
This handout has annotated examples of both quantitative and
qualitative methodologies.

What are Quantitative and Qualitative Research?
Quantitative research involves collecting numerical data and conducting mathematical analyses
to observe trends, make predictions, run experiments, and test hypotheses. Qualitative research
involves collecting non-numerical data and identifying patterns in language, theme, and
structure, among other features, to understand human experiences. Instruments for qualitative
research include questionnaires, interviews, and observations.

What Information Should You Include in the Methodology?
The goal of your methodology is to increase the credibility of your research by making your
process transparent and reproducible. Your methodology should begin by describing your
research question and the type of data you used in answering it. You want to indicate why this
type of data is appropriate, relevant, and important to the question being asked.
You will then explain your process of data collection. This is the place to state the tools and
materials that were used to collect data, the process and criteria you used to sample subjects, and
the size of your sample. If your research was quantitative, you will specify how your data was
measured. If your research was qualitative, you will describe how data was recorded and how
you observed and/or participated in the study. You want to provide enough detail for readers to
be able to replicate your procedure. If you used existing data sets instead of collecting new data,
you can elaborate on where you found the data sets, how the set was originally produced, and
what criteria you used to select the data. Remember to explain why you made these decisions.
After describing data collection, you will elaborate on data analysis. This includes how you
prepared the data for analysis and what tools you used to analyze it. If your research was
quantitative, you will outline the mathematical calculations you performed. You will also explain
why your calculations were appropriate for the data and the research question in hand. If your
research was qualitative, you will describe your process of interpreting, labeling, and analyzing
Methodology Section for Research Papers, Spring 2021.

1 of 5

data. When working with personal or sensitive data, you should describe the steps you took to
protect the privacy of your sources.
Finally, you will justify the approach you took. You should show that your approach was
appropriate to answering your research question. If your approach is unconventional, you should
explain why your approach was more effective than other methods. This is the place to mention
any difficulties or challenges you encountered in your approach and to explain how you
addressed these issues.

Sample Quantitative Methodology with Annotations
Study site. This study was conducted within an intact tabonuco
(Dacryodes excelsa)-dominated forest at ca 400 m elevation near
El Verde Field Station in the Luquillo Experimental Forest (LEF),
Puerto Rico (18°10’N, 65°30’W). The site is classiﬁed as a
subtropical wet forest, with average temperatures ranging between
21°C in January and 25°C in August (Waide & Reagan 1996).
Annual precipitation averages 3700 mm and varies seasonally,
with 200 to 250 mm/mo during January–April (dry season) and
350 mm/mo for the remainder of the year (McDowell &
Estrada-Pinto 1988). Precipitation exceeds evapotranspiration in
all months. Soils are Ultisols belonging to the Los Guineos series,
which are well drained, acidic clays and silty clay loams (Waide &
Reagan 1996).
Literbag preparation. Although litterbags may not accurately
depict true rates of litter decomposition due to the artiﬁcial drying
of the leaves (Taylor 1998), exclusion of large soil fauna (Stewart
& Davies 1989, González & Seastedt 2001), and microclimatic
alterations imposed on the decaying material (Heal et al. 1997), the
technique is a useful tool for experimental comparison of litter
decay (Swift et al. 1979, Heal et al. 1997). . . . Upon collection,
leaves were air-dried for 48 hours and stored until use. Litter of
each type was thoroughly mixed and litterbags (10 x 10 cm, 1 mm
ﬁberglass mesh) were then ﬁlled, so that each contained 2.5 ± 0.1 g
of leaf litter from only one of each species and treatment (green or
senesced). . . . Bags were placed on the forest ﬂoor in early
November 2001 and ﬁve replicates of each species and treatment
combination were collected at each of four sampling dates: 14, 28,
56, and 112 days. Upon collection, litterbags were oven-dried for
seven days at 50°C. Bags were then dismantled, leaf litter was
separated from soil, roots, and other debris, and the remaining leaf
Methodology Section for Research Papers, Spring 2021.

2 of 5

material was weighed to determine the fraction of leaf mass
remaining.
Nutrient analysis. Four subsamples for each species and treatment
were collected from the bulk litter during litterbag construction and
analyzed for total C, N, and ﬁber using methods described by
Madritch and Hunter (2002). Brieﬂy, samples were dried at 65°C
for three days, ground into a ﬁne powder, and then stored at 80°C
prior to analyses. Carbon and nitrogen were measured using a
Carlo Erba NA 1500 CHN Analyzer Ⓡ (Carlo Erba
Instrumentazione, Milan, Italy). Dry mass percentages of cellulose,
hemicellulose, and lignin were determined using sequential neutral
detergent/acid digestion in an Ankom Fiber Analyzer Ⓡ (ANKOM,
Fairport, New York).
Data analysis. The decomposition of leaf litter is commonly
described by a negative exponential function of the form: Xt/X0 =
e–kt, where X0 is the initial mass of litter, Xt is the mass of litter at
time t, and k is the decay rate constant (Olson 1963, Swift et al.
1979). The decay rate constant k thus provides a single,
functionally relevant parameter for describing decomposition. This
simple model, however, has been shown to inadequately depict
early stages of mass loss in some studies, thus prompting
modiﬁcations to the model (Gallardo & Merino 1993, Sullivan et
al. 1999). In this study, rapid initial mass losses of over 20 percent
in the ﬁrst two weeks resulted in a poor ﬁt of this traditional decay
model since the model requires the y-intercept to pass through
zero. To redress this problem, we allowed an intercept term yint in
the model that serves as an indicator of the initial mass loss or
leaching losses (Sullivan et al. 1999). This resulted in a model of
the form: ln(Xt/X0) = –k’t + yint, where Xt is the mass remaining at
time t, X0 is the original mass of the substrate, and k’ is a decay
rate constant describing a post-leaching phase of decomposition.
Multiple linear regression models using indicator variables for
treatment (green vs. senescent) were applied separately for each
species to test for differences in slope (k’) and yint between green
and senescent litters. N, C, ﬁber, and other litter quality indices
were analyzed for differences between green and senescent leaves
across all species using analysis of variance and within-species
using two-sample t-tests. Litter quality indices were also tested
Methodology Section for Research Papers, Spring 2021.

3 of 5

against the decay rates k’ using simple linear regression to
determine which indices best correlated with decay rates across all
species and treatments. All statistical analyses were conducted
using S-Plus statistical software (MathSoft 2000).
Source: Fonte and Schowalter, “Decomposition of Greenfall vs. Senescent Foliage in a Tropical
Forest Ecosystem in Puerto Rico,” bioTROPICA, 36(4) 2004.

Sample Qualitative Methodology with Annotations
To find out how Twitter users imagine their audience, we asked
them directly. We posted questions to our own followers (many of
whom retweeted our question to their followers) and sent @reply
questions to a sample of users whose tweets appear in the public
timeline, every person in the 300 most-followed accounts (249
total), and a subset of users with 1000–15,000 followers. While all
the Twitter accounts we reference are public, we anonymized all of
our informants except the highly-followed users. Our questions
included: ‘Who do you imagine reading your tweets?’ and ‘Who
do you tweet to?’ Later, we asked: ‘What makes an individual
seem “authentic” on Twitter? (Or what does it mean to be
authentic?)’ and ‘What won’t you tweet about? What subjects are
inappropriate for Twitter?’ Our goal in approaching different types
of users was not to get a representative sample of Twitter users but
to elicit potentially diverse perspectives.
Given the issues mentioned above, we are unable to assess how
many people saw our tweets. We received 226 responses from 181
Twitter users through direct messages or @replies to our queries.
The responses we received revealed many different perspectives on
audience. While we can neither quantify audience management
techniques nor account for all potential perspectives, the responses
we received provide valuable insight into some core differences in
conceptualizing audience. Future empirical work might examine
the prevalence of these strategies and their relationship to follower
counts, demographics, or genres of content.
Source: Marwick and Boyd, “I tweet honestly, I tweet Passionately: Twitter Users, Context
Collapse, and the Imagined Audience,” New Media & Society, 13(1) 2011.

Methodology Section for Research Papers, Spring 2021.

4 of 5

Activity: Learn About Methodologies in Your Field
Navigate to Google Scholar or your library database. Or visit the SJSU ScholarWorks page
(scholarworks.sjsu.edu), click “Collections,” select a college, select a department, and then click
to view “Master’s Theses and Graduate Research.” Find some articles, both quantitative and
qualitative if possible, on a high interest topic for your chosen field.
Compare the methodologies in these articles to the two samples we looked at above. What is
similar? What is different? What patterns seem most common? How long are the sections?

Reference
University of Southern California. Organizing Your Research Paper Methodology. USC
Libraries, 2021, July 27, https://libguides.usc.edu/writingguide/methodology.

Methodology Section for Research Papers, Spring 2021.

5 of 5

